PropBank Annotation Goals
PropBank is a corpus in which the arguments of each predicate are annotated with their semantic
roles in relation to the predicate (Palmer et al., 2005). Currently, all the PropBank annotations
are done on top of the phrase structure annotation of the Penn TreeBank (Marcus et al., 1993).
In addition to semantic role annotation, PropBank annotation requires the choice of a sense
id (also known as a frameset or roleset id) for each predicate. Thus, for each verb in every
tree (representing the phrase structure of the corresponding sentence), we create a PropBank
instance that consists of the sense id of the predicate (e.g. run.02) and its arguments labeled
with semantic roles.
An important goal is to provide consistent argument labels across different syntactic realizations
of the same verb, as in. . .
[John]ARG0 broke [the window]ARG1
[The window]ARG1 broke
As this example shows, the arguments of the verbs are labeled as numbered arguments: ARG0,
ARG1, ARG2, and so on. The argument structure of each predicate is outlined in the PropBank
frame file for that predicate. The frame file gives both semantic and syntactic information about
each sense of the predicate lemmas that have been encountered thus far in PropBank annotation.
The frame file also denotes the correspondences between numbered arguments and semantic
roles, as this is somewhat unique for each predicate. Numbered arguments reflect either the
arguments that are required for the valency of a predicate (e.g., agent, patient, benefactive),
or if not required, those that occur with high-frequency in actual usage. Although numbered
arguments correspond to slightly different semantic roles given the usage of each predicate, in
general numbered arguments correspond to the following semantic roles:
ARG0 agent 
ARG1 patient 
ARG2 instrument, benefactive, attribute
ARG3 starting point, benefactive, attribute
ARG4 ending point
ARGM modifier

Choosing ARG0 versus ARG1:
In most cases, choosing an argument label is straightforward, given the verb specific definition
of this label in the frame files. However, in some cases, it may be somewhat ambiguous whether
an argument should be annotated as ARG0 or ARG1; thus, the annotator must decide between
these labels based on the following explanations of what generally characterizes ARG0 and
ARG1.
The ARG0 label is assigned to arguments which are understood as agents, causers, or experiencers. The ARG1 label is usually assigned to the patient argument, i.e., the argument which
undergoes the change of state or is being affected by the action.
ARG0 arguments (which correspond to external arguments in GB theory) are the subjects
of transitive verbs and a class of intransitive verbs called unergatives. Semantically, external
arguments have what Dowty (1991) called Proto-Agent properties, such as:
1. Volitional involvement in the event or state
2. Causing an event or change of state in another participant
3. Movement relative to the position of another participant (Dowty, 1991)
Internal arguments (labeled as ARG1) are the objects of transitive verbs and the subjects of
intransitive verbs called unaccusatives. These arguments have Proto-Patient properties, which
means that these arguments:
1. Undergo change of state
2. Are causally affected by another participant
3. Are stationary relative to movement of another participant (Dowty, 1991)
Whereas for many verbs, the choice between ARG0 or ARG1 does not present any difficulties,
there is a class of intransitive verbs (known as verbs of variable behavior), where the argument
can be tagged as either ARG0 or ARG1.
[A bullet]ARG1 landed at his feet
[He]ARG0 landed
Arguments which are interpreted as agents should always be marked as ARG0, independent of
whether they are also the ones which undergo the action. In general, if an argument satisfies
two roles, the highest ranked argument label should be selected, where
ARG0 > ARG1 > ARG2 − 5 > ARGM
Given this rule, agents are ranked higher than patients. If an argument is both an agent and a
patient, then ARG0 label should be selected. An example of this is the verb meet:
John and Mary met at a cocktail party.
ARG0: John and Mary
REL: met
ARGM-LOC: at a cocktail party
Another good example of this is the verb move, which can have both an ARG0 (i.e. the mover)
and an ARG1 (i.e. the moved), though in some cases ARG0 and ARG1 are the same:
Digital ’s move into mainframes
ARG0: Digital ’s
REL: move
ARG2: into mainframes
Not all ARG0s are agentive, however. There are many inanimate as well as clausal arguments
which are being marked as ARG0s. These arguments are usually the ones which cause an action
or a change of state.
A notion which might be useful for selecting ARG0 arguments is the notion of internally caused
as opposed to externally caused eventualities, as defined in Levin and Rapapport (1995). In
internally-caused eventualities, some property inherent to the argument of the verb is responsible
for bringing about the eventuality. For agentive verbs such as play, speak, or work, the inherent
property responsible for the eventuality is the will or volition of the agent who performs the
activity. However, an internally caused eventuality need not be agentive. For example, the
verbs blush and tremble are not agentive, but they, nevertheless, can be considered to denote
internally caused eventualities, because these eventualities arise from internal properties of the
arguments, typically an emotional reaction. In contrast to internally caused verbs, verbs which
are externally caused inherently imply the existence of an external cause with an immediate
control over bringing about the eventuality denoted by the verb: an agent, and instrument,
a natural force, or a circumstance. Thus something breaks because of the existence of some
external cause; something does not break because of its own properties (Levin and Hovav,
1995). The difference between internal and external causation is important for distinguishing
ARG0s and ARG1s: the arguments which are responsible for bringing out the eventuality are
ARG0s, whereas those which undergo an externally caused event are ARG1s.
To sum up, ARG0 arguments are the arguments which cause the action denoted by the verb,
either agentively or not, as well as those which are traditionally classified as experiencers, e.g., the
arguments of stative verbs such as love, hate, fear. ARG1 arguments, on the other hand, are those
that change due to external causation, as well as other types of patient-like arguments.